# RSS/Atom feed: Why you should have one for your blog
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) and Atom (Atom Syndication Format) are two ways to syndicate your content across platforms. A lot of people have heard about RSS in some way or another, but less people know Atom. Atom is just a more modern version of RSS, but they serve the same purpose: Sharing updates from a source to different platforms. In this post I'll explain why you should be using a feed, be it Atom or RSS, for your blog. If you're wondering what the differences are between RSS and Atom, you can read about it on [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Atom_(Web_standard)#Atom_compared_to_RSS_2.0).

## Spreading your blog posts far and wide
When you're hosting your blog by yourself, or even when you host it on a website like wordpress.com, you will publish posts regularly. In order to reach the maximum amount of people, it's best to post your blog posts in as many places as possible. For example when this blog post publishes, it's automatically posted to [dev.to](https://dev.to/roelofjanelsinga), [MailChimp](https://mailchi.mp/d405013025c9/roelofjanelsinga), [Pinterest](https://nl.pinterest.com/roelofelsinga/blog-posts/), and several RSS readers. So when I publish a post, not only does it appear on my blog, it will be visible in many more places to reach a much larger audience. This is partially because my audience most likely has no clue my blog even exists, but it's also a convenience for them, because they get to read my blogs in the places they already visit. So it's a win-win, because my content gets read and people don't have to leave their platform in order to consume the content.

## Automation is magical
A lot of services are able to consume RSS and Atom feeds. This makes automation incredibly simple, because you only have to update the feed on your blog and all these other services will pick it up and perform some task for you. You don't have to manually tell those services that you published a new post, they will retrieve it from your website.