# When is optimization getting in the way of progress
When building a product it's often top priority to get a first version out of the door. When testing out an idea, getting a good prototype in front of some people is the most important part of the process. Without a product to get feedback on, you can't develop the product any further in a meaningful way. So when is this prototype done? That's what I'm trying to define in this post. Keep in mind that this is a new topic for me and I'm not a product manager in any way, so take this with a grain of salt.

## Define version 1.0
Before starting to work on a product, you should define what "done" means for the first version of the product. This might seem a little strange, since you're not sure what the customer is looking for, but this step is an important part of the process. You're defining a version 1.0 to avoid scope creep, which means that you're adding more features than intended, because scope creep can delay a "final version" indefinitely. You need to outline the very minimum amount of features for the product in order for it to be useful for the customer. These features will most likely change over time, but you need a base from which you can gather feedback. So come up with a few basic but essential features and build your product.

When these features are functional, you're ready to put the prototype in front of users.

## Leave features as basic as possible
After you've defined basic features, you can build them. Most software developers, including me, love to over engineer these features. I urge you to try your best to keep these features as basic as possible. These features are there to proof a concept and will very likely change a lot after user feedback. When you've built a beautiful fully featured product, changes become more difficult to apply. When you've kept the product nice and simple, you can make changes quickly and even add and remove features as they proof to be obsolete or very useful to your users.

So keep the features simple, both in design and function. The best way to test features is to leave out 90% of the details and make it very obvious to the user what something does. You can always extend functionality and customization. The goal of the first version is to get users familiar with the potential capabilities of the product, not with the configuration settings in a menu. It's best to not allow for any customizations until there is a need for any of them. Keep it simple for yourself and the users, until more is needed.

## Optimize when you have the data
Optimizing features is one of my favorite things to do, but you can't do this if you have no idea what the user needs or does with your product. Only optimize when you have enough information to make decisions. This way you can actually measure your optimizations. Without measuring your changes, you're making changes blindly and this could actually make the product worse, not better. However, if you're not measuring anything, you won't know how the changes impact the users, unless you directly ask them for feedback.

## Gathering data
It's very tempting to throw something like Google Analytics at the problem and just start measuring everything. Don't do this, because you need to define very specific things to measure, otherwise you end up with data that could be completely irrelevant. All this data could make it very easy to make decisions based on data that doesn't actually represent real world behavior of your users. In fact, I wouldn't even recommend using Google Analytics for very specific products and processes if you're not sure what you'll use the data for. Google Analytics is amazing for static websites to figure out what users do, but using it for more complex processes might be too much work. Let me explain my reasoning on this.

I would try to build something that's built-in your product to measure very specific metrics. This way you know exactly what you're measuring and why. That's where the real benefit of measuring and gathering data comes from. You can do all of these things in Google Analytics through the dataLayer object as well, but again, this might be more work than it helps you. This steps really depends on what you know how to do and want to do. In most cases, I like to build this into the product, because I can reuse the measurements and observed behavior for many more things than simply tracking users. So building this into the product serves more than one purpose, which makes it worth it for me in the end.

Things like "user viewed product X 3 times" could be tracked and then used to set off an email to that user with some additional information, then added as a favorite within their account, etc. Building this into the product makes it very easy to extend this. If you were to use Google Analytics here, you can mark this in some way, but you don't get any additional benefit from it.

## Make decisions based on data
